               EI: A Program for Ecological Inference
                              Gary King
                          <King@Harvard.Edu>
                      <HTTP://GKing.Harvard.Edu>

             (c) Copyright 1995-2001, All rights Reserved.

This program provides easy methods of running the statistical
procedures, diagnostics, and graphics in _A Solution to the Ecological
Inference Problem: Reconstructing Individual Behavior from Aggregate
Data_, a book by Gary King (Princeton University Press, 1997).

EI requires Gauss and the Gauss module CML. It can run on any computer
system that runs Gauss.  (A stand-alone, menu-driven program called
EzI that runs without Gauss, is available from my homepage, but it
is less flexible.)

**************
*INSTALLATION*
**************

(1) Unzip this file with the public domain unzip program:

             from DOS:     unzip ei.zip
             from UNIX:    unzip -a ei.zip

(2) print the documentation by copying it to a postscript printer.
(If you do not have a postscript printer, obtain the public domain
program Ghostscript, which translates from postscript to other printer
formats. You can get information about how to obtain Ghostscript from
my homepage.  You can also bring the postscript file to most xerox
shops, which will print it for you.  Alternative, the documentation
can also be read on-line, and printed from your web browser, from my
web page.  A PDF version can also be found there.):

             From DOS:    copy ei.ps lpt1:
             From Unix:   lp ei.ps

(3a) ON A DOS, WINDOWS 3.1, OS/2 or WIN95/98-BASED SYSTEM: Copy ei.lcg to
your c:\gauss\lib subdirectory, and copy the remaining program files
(*.src, ei.dec, ei.ext) to somewhere on the GAUSSPATH, such as the
default c:\gauss\src.  For example:

             copy ei.lcg c:\gauss\lib

             copy *.src c:\gauss\src
             copy ei.dec c:\gauss\src
             copy ei.ext c:\gauss\src

(3b) ON A UNIX-BASED SYSTEM: If you have supervisor privleges, follow
analogous steps as for DOS systems.  If you are not a supervisor, or
do not wish the program to be installed for all users, specify ei in
the library command with a path, e.g.: library /files/gking/ecinf/ei;

(4) If you have used an earlier version of EI, see the file "whatsnew"
for major changes.


Copyright information

EI is copyrighted, but you may use, copy, and distribute this program
for educational use provided that no charge is made and the copy is
identical to the original. To request an exception, please contact
Gary King.
